This week in virology, the podcast about viruses, the kind that make you sick.
From Microbe TV, this is Twiv, this week in virology, episode 811 recorded on September 30th, 2021.
I'm Vincent Drackeniello, and you're listening to the podcast All About Viruses,
joining me today from New York, Daniel Griffin. Hello, everyone.
And I hesitated slightly because it's the end of September, Daniel. Yes, 30 days has September
April, June, and November. Well, you went by quickly, didn't it? It did, actually.
How's the pandemic looking from your end, Daniel? You know, it's really tough. I was
actually thinking about this just over this last hour. There's always the numbers. They're
like, what are the numbers? What are the waves? But for me, a lot of COVID is sort of personal,
right? And so direct patient experience, having patients die, having patients not do well.
And that continues. I have a woman in her 40s unvaccinated in the ICU right now, and we're
talking about, you know, is she going to get better? Is she going to end up on ECMO? I'm,
you know, tragedies like that. Another, actually, I'll share this story because I think it's
illuminating. This is a family friend has a niece. The niece has Down syndrome. And the parents
are anti-vaxxers. You know, and I won't say vaccine has, and I'm just going to say full fledge.
And so the wife had to get vaccinated for work. But the father didn't, and the father about two
weeks ago actually got infected with COVID. And, you know, what often happens, he got better.
And this then reinforced his ideas that it was so much better to get infected with COVID,
you know, why get vaccinated. And there was a lot of discussion about, well, what about your
adolescent daughter with Down syndrome? Well, what about her? I mean, you potentially,
she's at risk. You haven't vaccinated her. And I think we know where this goes. The adolescent
daughter in her late teens ended up getting infected with COVID, had a positive test,
you know, reached out to the pediatrician, encouraging monoclonals, right? First week,
the pediatrician was not comfortable with the date on monoclonals and decided not to.
So this young lady ended up in the hospital on oxygen. And when she went into the hospital,
they noticed that her lymphocytes were low. So they were concerned that maybe her lymphocytes
were low because she coincidentally also had leukemia. And so they didn't want to start steroids
until they had a chance for a hematology consult, which did not occur until Monday,
she admitted Friday, hematology consult on Monday, finally Monday evening, they decided to start
the steroids. By Tuesday, she's in the ICU on high flow oxygen. She's required CPAP,
not doing well. I mean, this is all, you know, vaccine preventable.
You know, and I always tell the stories, like I don't tell the stories about when everything
goes smoothly. I think we learn from lessons like this. So, you know, unvaccinated,
putting a family member at risk, and maybe our audience isn't aware of, you know, down syndrome.
About four times more likely and ended up in the hospital, maybe 10 times as likely to die.
I mean, so this is a high risk condition. This young lady, a little bit heavier,
and then would be ideal, also putting an increased risk, not getting the monoclonals,
not getting the steroids with that delay, you know, and then sort of question about,
you know, should she be given to Salismab? And I'm going to get to some data on that. But by the
time you're, you know, requiring CPAP and high flow oxygen, you probably missed the window. We're
going to make a benefit there. So, for me, the pandemic is still continuing to be incredibly
painful on a personal level. But looking around the country, we are seeing a little bit of light.
We are seeing, you know, that things in many areas are getting better, but still an unacceptable
high rate of infection in our younger population.
Very sad story.
Yeah, it's just all right. Let me start off with our quotation.
Knowledge is no guarantee of good behavior, but ignorance is a virtual guarantee of bad behavior.
And that's by Martha Nussbaum. I love that. And hopefully what we're doing is we're providing
education. You know, I was doing a talk for one of the California schools last week. And, you know,
sort of the final question was one of those, you know, there's no right answer to this. But it was
about vaccine hesitancy and having conversations. And I guess my view has always been the long game.
If you are respectful, if you continue to provide education, I think that you may not get people
to make the right decision now, but you're building toward better decisions, better behavior in the
future. So all right, children and COVID. I like to say children are at risk for COVID. There's no
doubt. I think this is very clear. And also wearing a mask is less traumatic for a child
than being hospitalized. And I think our story reflects on that. I was on a call earlier this
morning with the consortium that I talked about where we're really trying to get good data on
COVID in children, and also whether or not, you know, as we've moved into the delta variant,
whether or not that is somehow having a different impact. But one of the things that came sort of
to my attention on the conversation is something we've talked about a little bit. There's this idea
that, oh, maybe this will become the next endemic coronavirus. Maybe children, if they get infected
in the first few years of life, they'll have this immunity that protects them going forward.
But one of the things that was shared, and this is consistent with what we're seeing here in the
US, if you look at under 18, and you actually look at zero to four, right? So babies and really young
children, that actually has for a while now had the highest associated rate per 100,000 population
of ending up in hospital. So this whole idea that it's a continuum, the younger you are, the better
you're off with COVID actually breaks down in the zero to four. And one of the gentlemen on the
calls was from Brazil. And he was actually saying this has been a huge problem, really particularly
that first year of life, they're seeing a lot of hospitalizations, they're seeing deaths and so
sort of reflecting a situation. Vincent, did you have a thought on that?
Yeah, just one condition that might mitigate this, you know, if in the future when most
mothers are immune, they will pass antibodies to their babies, and that may reduce severity,
and then the baby is somewhat immune and it reduces disease subsequently.
Yeah, I like that idea. You know, and that's interesting because I know with Dixon,
when we've been on this week in parasitism, we've talked about when do we see the mortality
for childhood malaria, and it's after the children have lost that protective antibodies from mom.
So yeah, I hope hopefully that is an optimistic and hopefully that will that will pan out because
this is, if you think about it, what an incredible challenge to think that we're going to continue
to be able to keep our population well. We haven't even gotten there the first time,
but the idea that we're going to be able to always vaccinate against SARS-CoV-2. But now I'm
going to say in the child world, maybe this is the most exciting news for this week is on Tuesday,
September 28, Pfizer and BioNTech submitted initial data to the US FDA from their pivotal trial on
COVID-19 vaccine in children, five to 12 years of age, and then they wanted to say, and I think
this is really important that people have the clear message, formal submission to request
emergency use authorization to follow in the coming weeks. So the clock is not really officially
started, and that clock is when they request EUA, there's a 15-day period of public comment,
and then we hear from the FDA if they're going to extend it. So we are all
keeping our fingers crossed that there will be vaccines down to five years of age by Halloween.
And I guess that moves us right into active vaccination, right? Vaccines, the jabs that keep
you from getting sick, and this will be a public service announcement right here. It's time to get
that flu shot, right? Where by the time this drops, we're in October, and the current guidance from
the CDC for the use of COVID-19 vaccines is that these vaccines can be co-administered with other
vaccines. So COVID-19 vaccines, influenza vaccines, you can co-administer. Early on, we were spacing,
in part, we were trying to understand the reactogenicity, things like that. At this point, don't miss
an opportunity. You never miss an opportunity to vaccinate if the person comes in, and they want
to get a COVID and a flu shot. We can do both at the same time. Well, how are we doing with the
third dose? You know, we had the early release from the MMWR, safety monitoring of an additional
dose of COVID-19 vaccine, United States, August 12 through September 19, 2021. And basically,
the adverse reactions, the reactogenicity that we're seeing with those three is really similar
to what we saw with those two. So during August 12 through September 19, 2021, among 12,591 v-safe
registrants who completed a health check-in survey after all three doses of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine,
79.4 and 74.1 reported local or systemic reactions respectively. After the third dose,
77.6 and 76.5 reported local or systemic reactions after the dose. So this is really very similar.
We're seeing about the same. We know that now over half a million folks have jumped in now that
there's a booster, but we knew over a million had done it ahead of time. But I think this is
important. You know, we've still discussed a little bit about unknown benefit, but really
critical was following and continue to follow safety data. And so far, voluntary reports have
found no unexpected patterns of adverse reaction from this additional dose. The CDC is going to
continue to monitor the vaccine safety for these additional doses as they go out. Now,
one of the things I want to talk about in the vaccine area here is one of these
anti-vaccine tropes that's going around. It seemed like there was a lot of it this last week as
a health care worker vaccine mandates were going into effect. And this was this whole idea that
oh, I've already had COVID. Why are they forcing me? Why are they making me get vaccinated? If
you already have COVID, I'm never going to get this again. And this is this whole idea. There's a
local ID docket. He always just seems to muse about I don't understand how the vaccines
can be better than just getting infected with COVID. And most of us roll our eyes and wonder if
he's ever seen a second case of dengue or he's ever seen someone with tetanus and where this
comes from. But Oklahoma now has its weekly COVID-19 report, including reinfection data.
And I thought this was really interesting. It's actually got quite a little bit of press,
but they were actually now are reporting since May on the reinfection rate per 100,000 eligible
cases. And you can see this really has started to march up from 358 to 512 up to now in September,
over 1000 per 100,000 are getting reinfected. So I think it makes sense that it matches experience
that first three months after an infection, you're at a low reinfection rate, but it does really
seem like that protection drops off. This is, I have to say, there's two aspects of one is it's
a little bit frustrating, because I would like there to be better protection against reinfection.
We do know that there is a benefit to getting vaccinated. And we know that if you've been infected
and then you go ahead and get that vaccination, you have dropped your risk of reinfection by about
2.34 in that nice study from the MMWR. So we are routinely asking people not to have this
amusing. And just everyone, go ahead, get vaccinated. Do you have any comments there, Vincent?
From the incubator in Manhattan. And that's where we are. We're at the incubator now recording
everything here. And these are all cases in people who are not vaccinated, but had previously
recovered from COVID. Is that correct? Yes. And what is the overall in Oklahoma frequency again?
So what they're looking here is at the number of cases, it's funny, they call it cases eligible
for reinfection. So these are individuals who had a prior infection and now looking at the
reinfection cases and then counting them up over time. The test positivity rate in Oklahoma is about
15%. So they have actually a very high test positivity rate. So here you had 453,927 eligible
for reinfection. And they had 1,035 that ended up reinfected. What's that rate? Do you know all
fan? So that's the rate per 100,000. So you could actually multiply that by about 4.5. So really
was over 4,500 reinfections just in September. So can we compare that to vaccinated people?
Yeah, they actually they do that. They compare it and we see a range depending on when you look
of somewhere between two to 9.5 times as likely to get infected compared to the vaccinated people.
Okay, good. That's good. I wish more states did that.
Yeah, actually it would be nice. It would be nice. All right, passive vaccination, right? We
talked a little bit about monoclonals in our opening story. On September 29, so just yesterday,
the article, just yesterday when we're recording, and it'll be a few days for folks listening,
the article Regen Cove, antibody combination and outcomes in outpatient with COVID-19.
This article came out as a peer reviewed publication in the New England Journal in Madison.
And this paper describes the phase three portion of an adaptive trial where outpatient with COVID-19
and risk factors for severe disease were randomly assigned to receive various doses of intravenous
Regen Cove or placebo. So we've talked about a little of this data in the early pre-print and
in the press releases. But in the original phase three portion of the trial, 3,088 patients
with or without risk factors for severe COVID-19 were randomly assigned to receive a central
single intravenous dose of Regen Cove. And it's either 8,000 milligrams or 2,400 milligrams.
And the difference in dose, think about important in part for volume, right? Because we're also
thinking the potential that we can deliver these subcutaneous or IM in some. So in the amended
phase three portion of the trial, there was an additional 2,519 patients. So they're sort of
growing the numbers here. The median follow-up was 45 days, extending the follow-up from that
initial 29 days. 96.6% of the patients got past that 28 days and had this longer follow-up.
Now this is, I think, critical because timing and I keep getting at this. These patients had a
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 positive diagnostic test, no more than 72 hours prior to randomization,
and onset of any COVID-19 symptom, no more than seven days before randomization.
And they found that the COVID-19 related hospitalization or death from any cause,
there was a relative risk reduction of 70.4% p-value 0.02 with receiving the map, the monoclonal
antibody therapy. They also, the median time to resolution of symptoms was four days shorter
in the folks that got the regen COVID. And this was similar at the two different doses.
Serious adverse events, right? People at home worried about giving people this, 4% in the placebo
group, 1.1 and 1.3% in the two dosing groups for the maps. Infusion-related reactions occurred in
less than 0.3% of the patients in all groups. So this, you know, just to reinforce, this is a
very safe. Your patient is much more likely to have problems not getting the monoclonals than they
are getting the monoclonals. And the monoclonals continue to really do a tremendous job of reducing
the risk of COVID-19 related hospitalizations or death. This really still remains our most
effective antiviral therapeutic. But what about the real antivirals, right? The traditional,
where are the pills? And so on September 27, Pfizer announced that they were starting their epic
PEP trial. So that's evaluation of protease inhibition for COVID-19 in post-exposure prophylaxis.
So this is really interesting. Sort of moving on to the second level. We know we have a number
of trials going on where people get acutely ill. We try to rapidly give them antivirals.
But now we're already moving on to this study where they're looking at a household. So this
study will evaluate the novel protease inhibitor, PF07321332, co-administered with a low dose of
retinovir. That's actually a pharmacological boost. So it keeps the drug from being metabolized. So
it could be present and effective for a longer period of time, something we learned from the HIV
days, for prevention of illness and adults living in the same household as someone with COVID-19.
So the whole idea here is someone in the household. You're at high risk. You give it to everyone
as a post-exposure prophylaxis. And this can potentially be administered at the first sign
of infection, or in this case, exposure to SARS-CoV-2, without requiring the person to be hospitalized
without requiring intravenous therapy. So we're looking forward to that. This will be a phase two,
three trial. And this is going to be twice daily for five or 10 days. So we'll get some
information on how well this works. All right, the period of detectable viral replication,
right? And hopefully we keep through repetition sort of reinforcing what are the evidence-based
interventions at each stage, right? So here, now we have the period of detectable viral replication,
the time for monitoring and monoclonal, not the time for antibiotics. They are not helpful,
potentially harmful, not the time for steroids. Very clear that we can do harm.
But the monoclonals have now been added to the WHO COVID living guidelines. So the WHO now
recommends antibody treatment for COVID patients at high risk for hospital admission,
and for severely ill patients who have no natural antibodies to COVID-19. So that's a little bit,
that's a little bit different. So we'll go into this a little bit. So what they have to say is
a treatment combining two antibodies. And here it's the regen cove, so that Casa Rivamab and
Imdevamab is recommended by two specific groups of patients with COVID-19. This is the WHO
guideline development group, which is a panel of international experts and patients. And this was
in the BMJ on Friday, September 24th. Now the first group are patients at high risk of hospitalization,
but the second group, these are individuals who actually have severe or critical COVID-19.
These are those individuals, which actually we're getting into the next group, they're getting
hospitalized, they're starting to get into that early inflammatory phase, but they're still
zero negative. They still do not have measurable antibodies. And it's the second recommendation
that is actually outside the current EUA in the US. So the second recommendation, so giving monoclonals
to severe or critically ill COVID-19 patients who are admitted, but still are zero negative,
is based on the data that we discussed a while back came out, became available in June,
the recovery trial, where we saw that Casa Rivamab and Imdevamab reduced deaths. And they
actually gave a range. They suggested that 49 fewer per thousand, maybe as high as 78,
maybe 87 fewer in the critically ill, also reducing the need for mechanical ventilation.
So we'll have to see when that gets updated here in the US, but WHO is actually recommending
not just that first week, but if you check zero serology data on admission,
this is a group that we have data suggesting that they would benefit. So still outside the
EUA here in the US, we have to wait for that. We're also anxiously waiting for the data, as I mentioned,
the other oral antiviral. So we have Merck and Ridgeback biotherapeutics with Mal-Nupiravir.
We have Roshna-Tia pharmaceuticals with AT527 and Pfizer's drug, as we discussed. It's actually
interesting. There's a little bit of a challenge to recruit for these trials. So hopefully we can
get those trials done and we can get that information. All right, let's move into the early inflammatory
phase. This is usually when people get hospitalized, and we're going to be talking about tosyllismab
again, and really hitting as we keep hitting on how critical timing is for different therapeutics.
So in the Journal of Respiratory Care, the peer review publication, Impact of Timing of
tosyllismab use in hospitalized patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection was published.
And we've talked previously about the eight randomized controlled trials, including the
recovery trial again that demonstrated a mortality benefit for patients and led to the inclusion
of tosyllismab in the IDSA guidelines, the NIH guidelines, the WHO COVID-19 guidelines.
Now, several health care systems, unfortunately, as tosyllismab has been embraced, there's been some
degree of rationing. So several health care systems have tried to create guidelines so that
everyone doesn't get tosyllismab, but hopefully that it's going to the patients that can benefit
the most. We'll see if that's working out. And one of the rationings has been to wait until
patients are on hyphenasal cannula or higher levels of oxygen support before they get tosyllismab.
We're going to see from this trial that maybe that is waiting too long, maybe that is after
the window of benefit has closed. So the authors performed a retrospective chart review of 11,512
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2, who are admitted to a New York health system from March to May 2020.
I will mention that that health care system is north well. I actually know the authors on this
paper. Tosyllismab was administered to subjects at the nasal cannula level of oxygen support
to maintain an oxygen saturation of greater than 88%. The primary outcome of interest was
hospital mortality, and the secondary outcomes were progression to mechanical ventilation,
prevalence of venous thromboembolism, renal failure, change in C-reactive protein,
D-dimer and ferritin levels, propensity score matching was used to minimize any selection bias.
And what did they find? Let's cut to the chase here. The hospital mortality was significantly
reduced in the tosyllismab group when it was administered at the nasal cannula level. So this
was a drop from 22% down to 10.4%. So 53% mortality reduction when tosyllismab was administered at
the nasal cannula level. If they waited till the individuals were requiring non-rebreather,
high-flow nasal cannula, non-invasive ventilator, you actually were losing any benefit.
So the window basically was closed. So we're hoping we'll get our guidelines sort of updated
with this. And so just a little shout out to the corresponding and lead author, Anup K Singh,
he actually sent me this sort of what it was still in the galley-proof stage. So I got to be all
the corrections. But he's really been, I think, a leader, the folks at the Lennox Hill Hospital
in the city have really done a good job of sort of understanding the disease, really being on
the forefront. And so I think this was helpful. But just to reinforce, timing really matters.
If you give it in that first several days, there's actually a wonderful figure, this figure one,
where not only can you see the mortality benefit relative to what level of oxygen support they give,
but you can also see how important the timing was. If they got the tosyllismab within the first
couple days, even out to about day five with the nasal cannula, you were seeing low mortality.
But once you waited, started giving it after day five, you really see that mortality start to go up.
So earlier at the right time, people who have maybe gone from two to six liters of nasal cannula,
who have inflammatory markers who are progressing despite steroids. But if you wait till they're
on high flow nasal cannula, you've waited too long and you're actually giving the medicine to
people that don't benefit from it. What does it mean nasal cannula? Is that nebulized?
No, actually, this is great, right? We've all seen the movies, you know, where the person has this
plastic thing and they've got little prongs in the nose. So that's nasal cannula. Next,
I appreciate jumping in here because let's talk about oxygen therapy and what I mean here.
One of the most important things for us as clinicians treating patients with COVID-19
is what level of pulmonary support do they require. So one of the first things I want to know when
a patient shows up in the hospitals, what is there a level of oxygen saturation on room air?
So I'll often turn off the oxygen because I want that number because I want to know,
I mean, we had a patient yesterday came in, he was on three liters of oxygen via that nasal cannula,
siding in the 90s, but then we turned it off and he was still 95% with it turned off.
So you really want to get that baseline. Now, the next thing is once you establish that they do
require oxygen, so they do have a level of hypoxemia that warrants admission for severe COVID and
oxygen support. How much do they require? Now that nasal cannula that we're used to,
seeing in the TV shows can deliver, we say up to about six liters, sometimes we'll turn it up to
10. And then the next level of support is something that we call a been sure mask,
which allows us with a twist of a knob to deliver a slightly higher amount of oxygen that we can
regulate. And then we move to the full non rebreather, which is the mask with the little bag below it
or reminiscent of what you see on an airplane. Above that, something we're using more and more
is a high flow nasal cannula, where instead of the small prongs, you actually have two larger
prongs that really fit tightly in the nairies. And we might deliver 30 40 liters of oxygen
per minute directly in through that device. Sometimes we'll even put a non rebreather on top.
The next escalation is to the continuous positive airway pressure, the biphasic positive air pressure,
where there's a different force in versus out. And then often we have to move on to mechanical
ventilation. So how do you get the tosy in the nasal cannula? Oh, so the tosy is intravenous.
It's just going in the vein. So when the person gets to, they've gone from two to six liters,
we've already given them steroids, you administer the tosyllism app as an intravenous medication.
So when they say at the nasal cannula level, it means that's where they're getting oxygen.
Yes. Not in their nose. Don't squirt it in their nose listeners.
Okay. All right. And I think that's really, I think that's critical, just reinforcing timing
really matters with this disease. And all right, I'm going to try to keep us from going too long
today, because I think we've been getting a little bit long. I know it's helping some people's fitness
level and the dogs are liking me. But long COVID, COVID is not just a two week viral illness for
many people. And apparently we need to keep reminding people of this because I've actually
started to see literature now again, sort of this return to dismissiveness. But the paper
incidents, co-occurrence and evolution of long COVID features, a six month retrospective cohort
study of 2,273,618 survivors of COVID-19 was published in plus medicine. And here, this was an
electronic health record study looking at data from 81 million patients included in this were
those 273,618 COVID-19 survivors. And they looked at the incidents and co-occurrence within six
months and in the three to six months for nine core features of long COVID. And basically just
to reinforce again, in this really large data set, they found that COVID-19 was associated with
long term effects that were common and diverse with 57% of patients having at least one long
COVID feature recorded in the 180 days after infection, 37% still having issues 90 to 180 days
after diagnosis. And I'm going to close this out here with no one is safe until everyone is safe.
And I'm going to give a shout out to TWIV 807. I like all the twibs. But I really enjoyed the
shot yearned around the world with Chaddie, Sadhroy and Carleen Wagner. Really nice discussion about
what would have happened in different scenarios where vaccines got off to other parts of the world
with us a little more vaccine equity. And along those lines with that theme, I'm going to remind
everyone go to parasiteswithoutporters.com. During the months of August, September, October,
click that donate money and help us click that donate button and help us support floating doctors.
They're going to be working with the Ministry of Health down in Panama, getting those vaccines
out, continuing to provide care down there. And I have to say thank you so much because
our listeners have been incredibly generous. And we need the funds to do what we do.
These organizations need the funds to do what they're going to do. Be part of the solution. So
thank you so much. Time for some email questions for Daniel. You can send yours to Daniel at microbe.tv.
Ronald writes, I'm writing from Florida where the sheriff's department bans masks won't let you
in if you're wearing one. And the governor is bent on endangering the lives of our children.
I know you've discussed Ivermectin ad nauseam. I'm hoping you could take a look at a site that
exists solely to promote Ivermectin for the treatment of COVID-19 and give me some tips on how to debunk
it. I V and meta.com is a site devoted solely to convincing people that Ivermectin is the cure,
spends a good bit of space listing countries that use it. The main method is to use web
crawlers to find peer reviewed studies on all sorts of sites. And they mentioned straight
out multiple treatments are typically used in combination, including monoclonals. I've pointed
out to those citing this site as science that a treatment of tap water and monoclonals if given
early will show benefit, not all due to the tap water. I showed them your last assessment.
And the response was, I don't know why the fine doctor says there's not enough evidence. There's
tons of proof and they point to the site. It appears that they find any study that mentions Ivermectin
web scrape, the most serious outcome, the count of participants in the percentage benefit. Do
something they call exclusion based on sensitivity and then they add the counts and percentages to
their total to give them one huge study that has supposedly meaningful adults. Yes. Okay. I was
at the end there, I was reminded of Mark Chris Lapps. He always talks about when you take a whole
bunch of cow dung and you pile it high enough, suddenly it turns into gold. And that doesn't
work. You've got to look at each little bit of cow dung. And if it's cow dung, you throw it out,
you don't pile it on top of each other. I think hopefully we're going to learn from the Ivermectin
story that if you leave a vacuum, things like this happen, we needed to do proper randomized
control trials in this country to assess whether or not there is or is not a role of Ivermectin.
We haven't done those. There's been the Egypt study that never happened, the Peruvian study
that seems to have never happened. There's meta-analyses that used those studies that have not been
retracted. I think this has really become a difficult situation. I think that Bill Gates was really
smart early on to put the microchips in the Ivermectin horse paste. So he's accomplishing his
microchip control that way because he knew those people would not take the joking, joking. But
no, this is really challenging. There are clearly people out there who cherry pick to support their
conclusion. Science is not about supporting your conclusion. Science is about discovering the truth.
And the way you discover the truth is by being honest, not looking for support for your agenda,
but looking for reliable data that can allow you to find the truth. And so yeah, this is very
challenging. John writes, are there numbers anywhere for the vaccination rate among those
who have already had COVID? Does anyone who has already been through it refuse a jab or two,
I suspect the present is higher than overall anyway, which might be another argument to the
stridently obtuse? Yeah, I don't, you know, we're starting to get as we talk this week about a
little more granular data. And I do not know, you know, where to get really good numbers on the
breakdown. I've seen numbers that break down by political party, which I'm not that interested in,
but I would definitely be interested in this. But you know, there is, I'm going to call this,
this myth that there's just these hordes of anti-vaxxers who won't get vaccinated.
Most of us are getting vaccinated. The majority of people who are eligible this country have
gotten vaccinated. And with the mandates, some people that were not that excited about
have either gotten vaccinated because they had to, or they've basically been given a way to
safe face and get vaccinated. But no, this would be interesting to see what those numbers are.
Hopefully what will happen here is that anti-vaxx trope about natural immunity being so wonderful
will be dispelled and people will clearly see that growing numbers of individuals previously
infected are getting reinfected. And the data we already have is that vaccination, even in a
population that was previously infected, can significantly decrease your chance of getting
infected again and having a bad outcome. Nick writes, my wife is pregnant 24 weeks. She had
COVID in January this year. We've read articles stating that immunity given after infection is
better than the immunity given after vaccination. So based on that, she doesn't want to get vaccinated
until after she gives birth. I'm an ICU nurse fully vaccinated who deals with COVID on each
shift. And I'm concerned given how I see the worst of the worst with COVID.
Yeah, no, I'm going to share your concern. And, you know, what are the things that we know here
one, and we just touched on a little bit is people who like the idea that natural
immunity is better than the vaccine do cherry pick data. There was a pre-print
that is really the famous Israeli preprint that suggested that natural immunity prior
infection was better than vaccine has been touted and circulated out there. It's not peer review.
It's not reliable. We actually talked about some state level data in Oklahoma, suggesting that
vaccinated people are better off or better protected. We also know that if you were infected before
and get a vaccine, you're going to more than 2.3 more than twice as likely decrease your risk of
an infection. And remember, a pregnant woman is trying to make a decision for herself and for
the newborn child. Pregnant women are much higher risk of ending up in the hospital.
They're at much higher risk of ending up in the ICU and on a ventilator if they end up in the hospital,
and they're significantly more likely to die. So this is a very high risk period. This is not
a great time to be relying on natural previous infection immunity when you can have that extra
safety of getting a vaccine. And we also know incredibly safe, no safety signal. So there's no
reason not to get that extra protection if you're a pregnant woman. And finally, Jessica writes,
as a young nursing student, I was taught that when giving injections that were not meant to be IV,
care should be taken after inserting the needle to pull back and make sure no blood came back.
Now retired, I've been told most people don't bother with that anymore.
And then she says, what do you think about this study where mRNA vaccines were injected into mice,
one group intravenously, one group intramuscularly, they removed heart tissue and they found that
intravenous injection leads to acute myoparic carditis in mice. And she says, it's only one
paper, it's mice. But what do you think? Yeah, no, so we, I feel like we're circling back,
which is interesting. I, I'm old, I was trained, put the needle in and pull back. But then they did
a number of studies showing, you know, no obvious benefit and actually an increase. Actually,
it's painful actually, apparently, when you pull back like that. So the recommendation is currently,
a couple of things. One is don't pull back on the plunger. The other is if you're going to not be
doing the deltoid to do the lateral thigh instead of the buttocks. So things have evolved over time.
But this is interesting with the mRNA vaccines. Would, would we be better off returning to that
pull back the plunger? I don't know, but it's, it is worth studying, because even though the incidence
of myocarditis is incredibly low, and most cases tend to be mild, like that's important to point
out, a myocarditis that lasts 48 hours resolves with now where months out, not seeing any sequelae,
a good resolution, quite different than the myocarditis that you get with COVID. But still,
anything we can do to reduce that risk, I think is worth studying. So I would welcome,
I mean, that's, that's what we have to do. We have to keep studying. We have to put more money
into the science, because we certainly see how expensive it is to not put the money in the science.
That's COVID-19 clinical update number 82 with Dr. Daniel Griffin. Thank you, Daniel.
Thank you, Vincent. Everyone, be safe.